hwmv2: doc: update board porting guide to match new hardware model (#68792)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/hardware/porting/board_porting.rst

support for at least one SoC and all of its features. Therefore, Zephyr must
support your :term:`SoC` as well.

.. _board_and_identifiers

> Board and board identifiers

Author: the intention was to cover the whole string under the term board identifier.

Meaning the board identifier captures to combined soc + cpu-cluster + variant identifier.

Would updating to:
`Board and identifiers` or
`Board and SoC / cpu-cluster / variant identifiers`

be better titles ?
I'm also open to other suggestions.

> Board and board identifiers

Reviewer: Is there an overall "board identifier" concept? (something like "the collation of the soc/cpu-cluter/variant identifiers")?
(if there is it could just be described in the text / defined to be that in the latest paragraph of this section).

> Board and board identifiers

Reviewer: A related topic, is the "underscory" version of the BOARD named something? (it could also be nice mentioning here that it exists, how it is generated, and that it is to automagically generate the board kconfig value)

> Board and board identifiers

Author: > Is there an overall "board identifier" concept? (something like "the collation of the soc/cpu-cluter/variant identifiers")?

Sort of, at least internally in the build system:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/85f99b0ae23822f96dac4c60cee79f9e7e214900/cmake/modules/boards.cmake#L77
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/85f99b0ae23822f96dac4c60cee79f9e7e214900/boards/Kconfig.v2#L6

Just thinking that for the docs it might be valuable to not introduce to many new names.

> A related topic, is the "underscory" version of the BOARD named something? 

We have the generated `CONFIG_BOARD_<BOARD_FULL_STRING>` if that is what you're thinking about:
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/85f99b0ae23822f96dac4c60cee79f9e7e214900/boards/Kconfig.v2#L13

***************************

A board may be a physical piece of hardware or an emulated board.

> Furthermore a board may contain just a single SoC or it may contain multiple
> SoCs, as well as each SoC may be contain a single or multiple CPU cores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore a board may contain one or multiple SoCs. Also, each SoC may contain
one or multiple CPU cores.
```

Author: Fixed

> A board may further define multiple variants for various use-cases.

Reviewer: Do I understand correctly that the "variant" is a property of the "soc" property of the "board"?
(This paragraph, coming first, would seem to indicate there is also a "variant" property of the "board" itself)

Author: no, the variant is applied after the SoC (or cpucluster when such is defined).

How about shortening to: `It's possible to define variants for dedicated use-cases.` ?

Author: suggestion applied

Examples of such use-cases are:
- Variant which enables non-secure builds for SoCs containing a security
  processor.
- Variant enabling / changing the type of RAM used in by the build.

> A ``/`` is used as separator between the board name and the following

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A ``/`` is used as separator between the board name and the following:
```

Author: Fixed

> SoC, cpu core, variant identifiers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SoC, CPU core and variant identifiers.
```

Author: Fixed

> If a board contains a single SoC, then the SoC can be omitted when building.

Reviewer 4: I'd suggest 'only a single core SoC'

Author: Fixed.

Let's say there is a board named ``plank`` with a single-core SoC ``socA``.

> The board including the identifier is: ``plank/socA``.

Reviewer 3: `soc1` would be better, `socA` gives the wrong impression with camel case when it should be snake case

Author: Agreed and done.
All occurrences of `socA` updated to `soc1`.

> As ``plank`` is a single SoC board, then the following in equivalent: ``plank``.

Reviewer 3: in equivalent? And equivalent to what?

Author: > in equivalent? And equivalent to what?

`is equivalent`, and should be read in relation to above lines, meaning equivalent to `plank/soc1`.

But I opted for the `the following is sufficient` suggestion.

So to build hello world for ``plank`` you can do:

.. code-block:: console

   west build -b plank samples/hello_world

If ``plank`` defines build variants, then those are identified by appending
``/<variant>`` name after the SoC, for example to build for ``foo`` variant,
use: ``plank/socA/foo``, and if omitting the SoC use: ``plank//foo``.
Here the double ``//`` indicates to the build system that the SoC has been
omitted.

So to build hello world for ``plank``, variant ``foo``, you can do:

.. code-block:: console

   west build -b plank//foo samples/hello_world

> When using multi-core SoCs, then CPU core is identified after the SoC

Author: Fixed

identifier.

If ``socA`` above has two cores, ``first`` and ``second``, then those are
identified as: ``plank/socA/first`` and ``plank/socA/second``.

And similar to before, if the board has only a single SoC, the SoC can be
omitted, that is ``plank//first`` and ``plank//second`` is an identical short
form.

Boards, SoCs, etc.
******************

Zephyr's hardware support hierarchy has these layers, from most to least
specific:

- Board: a specific board which usually corresponds to a physical board.
         A board may contain multiple SoCs.

>          A build  target a specific SoC / CPU core on a multi SoC board or a

Author: > Side comment: referring to "CPU core" in general can be ambiguous wrt. SMP.

Good point, and we for the exact same reason use `cpu-cluster` in the soc yaml.
Let me try to do a bit more updating than jsut the board part I initially intended to update.

Also thanks for the proposal.

>          A build  target a specific SoC / CPU core on a multi SoC board or a

Author: Cpucluster description added, and various places updated to use the term cluster instead of core when the first is a better use.

         specific core for a multi-core SoC.

> - SoC series: a smaller group of tightly related SoCs

Author: guess the existing line was deleted by accident.

I actually intended just to modify the existing Board description part.

support for at least one SoC and all of its features. Therefore, Zephyr must
support your :term:`SoC` as well.

.. _board_and_identifiers:

Board and board identifiers
***************************

A board may be a physical piece of hardware or an emulated board.
Furthermore a board may contain one or multiple SoCs. Also, each SoC may contain

> one or multiple cpuclusters. Note, a cpucluster may refer to a single CPU core.

Reviewer 5: you need to explain what a cpucluster with more details. You are assuming that cpucluster is obvious and established terminology, it is not.

Reviewer 6: @tejlmand I second @nashif  comment. We need to understand if a cluster is a group of similar cores or different ones.

e.g a board with 4 arm cores and 1 DSP would have 2 clusters (4 x arm + 1 x dsp) or 1 cluster with all cores.

Author: Good points indeed.

Have improved the description and also mention the current design limitation in Zephyr.
Extending the model is something we can consider in the future.

It's possible to define variants for dedicated use-cases.
Examples of such use-cases are:

- Variant which enables non-secure builds for SoCs containing a security
  processor.
- Variant enabling / changing the type of RAM used in by the build.

A ``/`` is used as separator between the board name and the following:
SoC, CPU cluster, and variant identifiers.

If a board contains only a single core SoC, then the SoC can be omitted when
building.

Let's say there is a board named ``plank`` with a single-core SoC ``soc1``.
The board including the identifier is: ``plank/soc1``.

As ``plank`` is a single SoC board, then the following is sufficient: ``plank``
to use as board when building.

> If ``plank`` defines board variants, then those are identified by appending

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If ``plank`` defines board variants, then those are identified by appending the
```

Author: fixed

> ``/<variant>`` name after the SoC, for example to build for ``foo`` variant,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``/<variant>`` name after the SoC, for example to build for the ``foo`` variant,
```

Author: fixed

support for at least one SoC and all of its features. Therefore, Zephyr must
support your :term:`SoC` as well.

.. _board_and_identifiers:

Board and board identifiers
***************************

A board may be a physical piece of hardware or an emulated board.
Furthermore a board may contain one or multiple SoCs. Also, each SoC may contain
one or multiple cpuclusters. Note, a cpucluster may refer to a single CPU core.

> It's possible to define variants for dedicated use-cases.

Author: > I wonder if variants should be moved to their own section, after revisions.

I think that could be a valid follow-up, for now I believe it's more important to have it as part of the board identifier, as it tied to soc / cpucluster in how it's specified and sanitized into file names.

> it would've been nice to have a precise definition of a variant

tricky, because a variant is very generic and is intended to cover all the (mis)use-case where variants in v1 was (wrongly) done as an independent board, simply because a proper model wasn't available.

So variant is quite generic, and covers cases not identified by soc / cpucluster.

Will consider how to phrase, but if you have a concrete proposal then I would be happy to see it.

> what distinguishes it from a revision

I think I would prefer to not introduce / reference revision at this point.
But could make sense to describe this in revision section.

Especially because a revision can be seen as a special case of a variant.

Examples of such use-cases are:

- Variant which enables non-secure builds for SoCs containing a security
  processor.
- Variant enabling / changing the type of RAM used in by the build.

A ``/`` is used as separator between the board name and the following:
SoC, CPU cluster, and variant identifiers.

If a board contains only a single core SoC, then the SoC can be omitted when
building.

Let's say there is a board named ``plank`` with a single-core SoC ``soc1``.
The board including the identifier is: ``plank/soc1``.

As ``plank`` is a single SoC board, then the following is sufficient: ``plank``.

So to build hello world for ``plank`` you can do:

.. code-block:: console

>    west build -b plank samples/hello_world

Author: fair point.

Removed

Here are some examples. Notice how the SoC series and family levels are
not always used.

.. table::

   +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

>    | Board                                            | Identifier  | SoC         | SoC Series    | SoC family    | CPU core       | Architecture |

Author: > It would be good to have an example with more than just a soc or CPU selection (meaning an example with a SOC + CPU + variant selection)

I think the variant selection part goes a bit beyond the purpose of the original table, which is seen here: https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/hardware/porting/board_porting.html#boards-socs-etc

where I believe the purpose is to show the different layers.
Those layers don't change when building for a variant.

My main purpose with updating the table is to show how the identifier fits into this table, and the fact that a board now supports multiple SoCs or cpu-clusters (often a cpu-cluster in identical to a cpu core)

And as part of this, show that two cores may be of different architectures.

> The "CPU core" column seems a bit ambiguous to me. Looking at the current description I do not if you mean the "CPU model/type" or you intend to refer to a particular CPU instance. 

I intended to extend the table to show the cpu-cluster as we describe it in the soc.yml, as that is what users will be building for.
So in the nrf5340 case, this would be `cpuapp` and `cpunet`, both of type cortex-m33.

> An example with a AMP SOC with the same type of core would be nice

Guess the nrf5340 would be a good candidate.
Probably a dual SoC board should also be added to this table.

>    | Board                                            | Identifier  | SoC         | SoC Series    | SoC family    | CPU core       | Architecture |

Author: Added nRF5340 to the table.
Atm it's the only amp soc on the collab-hwm branch which has identical architecture on both cores.

   +==================================================+=============+=============+===============+===============+================+==============+
   | :ref:`nrf52dk <nrf52dk>`                         | /nRF52832   | nRF52832    | nRF52         | Nordic nRF5   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |
   +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`frdm_k64f <frdm_k64f>`                     |             | MK64F12     | Kinetis K6x   | NXP Kinetis   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |
   +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

>    | :ref:`stm32h747i_disco <stm32h747i_disco_board>` |             | STM32H747XI | STM32H7       | STMicro STM32 | Arm Cortex-M7  | Arm          |

Reviewer 4: `stm32h747i_disco <stm32h747i_disco>`

Reviewer 4: Note that this is ambiguous as STM32H747XI is a dual core SoC (M7/M4), so it depends what you want to illustrate here

Author: > `stm32h747i_disco <stm32h747i_disco>`

according to this line the `_board` is correct.
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/a852186ace118de40329d76f3a5ce80aba81ef13/boards/boards_legacy/arm/stm32h747i_disco/doc/index.rst?plain=1#L1

but maybe there is a board porting PR which is updating this ?

> Note that this is ambiguous as STM32H747XI is a dual core SoC (M7/M4), so it depends what you want to illustrate here

Thanks for noticing.
I merely was updating the table to reflect the new format, so the basic purpose of the table haven't changed.
And while updating, I wanted to ensure that also a board with a multi-core SoC was also presented so that it was shown how that impacts the SoC, SoC series, and SoC family + architecture.

Guess I should extend `stm32h747i_disco` to show both cores (or remove it from the table, now that mimx8mp` presents similar).
A reason for having both mimx8mp and stm32h74i_disco could be to show both a dual core with same arch on both cores, and one with different archs.

If updating stm32h747i_disco in the table, then I prefer to have a fixed PR against collab-branch so I know final names / references to use.

   +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`rv32m1_vega_ri5cy <rv32m1_vega>`           |             | RV32M1      | (Not used)    | (Not used)    | RI5CY          | RISC-V       |
   +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`mimx8mp_evk <imx8mp_evk>`                  | /a53        | i.MX8M Plus | i.MXM8M A53   | NXP i.MX      | Arm Cortex-A53 | Arm64        |
   |                                                  +-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   |                                                  | /m7         | i.MX8M Plus | i.MXM8MM M4   | NXP i.MX      | Arm Cortex-M7  | Arm          |

>    +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

Author: Nice catch 👍

>    +--------------------------------------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

Author: Fixed

Here are some examples. Notice how the SoC series and family levels are
not always used.

.. table::

   +--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Board                                      | Identifier            | SoC         | SoC Series    | SoC family    | CPU core       | Architecture |
   +============================================+=======================+=============+===============+===============+================+==============+

>    | :ref:`nrf52dk <nrf52dk_nrf52832>`          | /nrf52832             | nRF52832    | nRF52         | Nordic nRF5   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |

Reviewer 3: family is actually nRF not nRF5

Author: actually I haven't changed that.
It's written as `Nordic nRF5` in the current docs:
https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/hardware/porting/board_porting.html#boards-socs-etc

but nRF is more correct, so updated.

   +--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`frdm_k64f <frdm_k64f>`               | /mk64f12              | MK64F12     | Kinetis K6x   | NXP Kinetis   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |
   +--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`rv32m1_vega <rv32m1_vega>`           | /openisa_rv32m1/ri5cy | RV32M1      | (Not used)    | (Not used)    | RI5CY          | RISC-V       |
   +--------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

>    | :ref:`nrf5340dk <nrf5340dk_nrf5340>`       | /nrf5340/cpuapp       | nRF5340     | nRF53         | Nordic nRF5   | Arm Cortex-M33 | Arm          |

Reviewer 3: Adding variant would be a useful example here too

Author: If I understand the current table correctly it tries to describe how hardware is modeled in Zephyr.

In that context I don't feel variant (or revision) fits in, as those wouldn't change anything in relation to the SoC, SoC series / family, CPU core, architecture.

Here are some examples. Notice how the SoC series and family levels are
not always used.

.. table::

   +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | Board                                            | Identifier      | SoC         | SoC Series    | SoC family    | CPU core       | Architecture |
   +==================================================+=================+=============+===============+===============+================+==============+
   | :ref:`nrf52dk <nrf52dk>`                         | /nRF52832       | nRF52832    | nRF52         | Nordic nRF5   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |
   +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`frdm_k64f <frdm_k64f>`                     |                 | MK64F12     | Kinetis K6x   | NXP Kinetis   | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |

>    +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
>    | :ref:`stm32h747i_disco <stm32h747i_disco_board>` |                 | STM32H747XI | STM32H7       | STMicro STM32 | Arm Cortex-M7  | Arm          |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | :ref:`stm32h747i_disco <stm32h747i_disco_board>` | /stm32h747xx/m7 | STM32H747XI | STM32H7       | STMicro STM32 | Arm Cortex-M7  | Arm          |
  +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+
   | |  /stm32h747xx/m4 | STM32H747XI | STM32H7       | STMicro STM32 | Arm Cortex-M4  | Arm          |
```

Author: stm32 has been removed as we have:
- `nrf5340dk` which shows the use of two cpuclusters where the cores in both clusters is of identical archtectures (cortex-m33 (arm))
- `mimx8mp_evk` which shows the use of two cpuclusters where the cores in the clusters are of different architectures (cortex-m7 (arm) / cortex-a53 (arm64))

   +--------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------+---------------+---------------+----------------+--------------+

>    | :ref:`rv32m1_vega_ri5cy <rv32m1_vega>`           |                 | RV32M1      | (Not used)    | (Not used)    | RI5CY          | RISC-V       |

Author: Table updated.

`stm32h747i_disco` removed as it provides no extra valuable example

  board documentation to find out for sure.
- asking your SoC vendor

> If you need to add SoC, CPU cluster, or even architecture support, this is the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need to add a SoC, CPU cluster, or even architecture support, this is the
```

Author: fixed

When adding a new SoC family or series for a vendor that already has SoC
support within Zephyr, please try to extract common functionality into shared
files to avoid duplication. If there is no support for your vendor yet, you can

> add it in a new directory ``zephyr/soc/<VENDOR>/<YOUR-SOC>``; please use

Author: Done, has been added to the note.

names that are already taken, and pick something new. Let's say your board is
called ``plank`` (please don't actually use that name).

Start by creating the board directory ``zephyr/boards/<VENDOR>/plank``, where
``<VENDOR>`` is your vendor subdirectory. (You don't have to put your
board directory in the zephyr repository, but it's the easiest way to get

> started.  See :ref:`custom_board_definition` for documentation on moving your

Reviewer: nit: Double space ".  "

Author: fixed

names that are already taken, and pick something new. Let's say your board is
called ``plank`` (please don't actually use that name).

Start by creating the board directory ``zephyr/boards/<VENDOR>/plank``, where
``<VENDOR>`` is your vendor subdirectory. (You don't have to put your
board directory in the zephyr repository, but it's the easiest way to get
started. See :ref:`custom_board_definition` for documentation on moving your
board directory to a separate repository once it's working.)

.. note::
  A ``<VENDOR>`` subdirectory is mandatory if contributing your board
  to Zephyr, but if your board is placed in a local repo, then any folder
  structure under ``<your-repo>/boards`` is permitted.
  If the vendor is defined in the list in
  :zephyr_file:`dts/bindings/vendor-prefixes.txt then you must use

>   that vendor prefix as ``<VENDOR>``.

Reviewer 3: Should mention the `others` folder as well if a vendor is not defined

Author: done

.. note::

  The board directory name does not need to match the name of the board.
  Multiple boards can even defined be in one directory.

Your board directory should look like this:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/<VENDOR>/plank
   ├── board.yml
   ├── board.cmake
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── doc
   │   ├── plank.png
   │   └── index.rst
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig
   ├── plank_<identifier>_defconfig
   ├── plank.dts
   ├── plank_<identifier>.dts
   └── plank.yaml

Replace ``plank`` with your board's name, of course.

The mandatory files are:

#. :file:`board.yml`: a YAML file describing the high-level meta data of the
   boards such as the boards names, their SoCs, and variants.

>    Cpu clusters for multi-core SoCs are not described in this file as they are

Reviewer 5: CPU

Author: Fixed

names that are already taken, and pick something new. Let's say your board is
called ``plank`` (please don't actually use that name).

Start by creating the board directory ``zephyr/boards/<VENDOR>/plank``, where
``<VENDOR>`` is your vendor subdirectory. (You don't have to put your
board directory in the zephyr repository, but it's the easiest way to get
started. See :ref:`custom_board_definition` for documentation on moving your
board directory to a separate repository once it's working.)

.. note::
  A ``<VENDOR>`` subdirectory is mandatory if contributing your board
  to Zephyr, but if your board is placed in a local repo, then any folder
  structure under ``<your-repo>/boards`` is permitted.
  If the vendor is defined in the list in

>   :zephyr_file:`dts/bindings/vendor-prefixes.txt then you must use

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  :zephyr_file:`dts/bindings/vendor-prefixes.txt` then you must use
```

Author: fixed

names that are already taken, and pick something new. Let's say your board is
called ``plank`` (please don't actually use that name).

Start by creating the board directory ``zephyr/boards/<VENDOR>/plank``, where
``<VENDOR>`` is your vendor subdirectory. (You don't have to put your
board directory in the zephyr repository, but it's the easiest way to get
started. See :ref:`custom_board_definition` for documentation on moving your
board directory to a separate repository once it's working.)

.. note::
  A ``<VENDOR>`` subdirectory is mandatory if contributing your board
  to Zephyr, but if your board is placed in a local repo, then any folder
  structure under ``<your-repo>/boards`` is permitted.

.. note::

  The board directory name does not need to match the name of the board.
  Multiple boards can even defined be in one directory.

Your board directory should look like this:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/<VENDOR>/plank
   ├── board.yml
   ├── board.cmake
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── doc
   │   ├── plank.png
   │   └── index.rst
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig

>    ├── plank_<identifier>_defconfig

Author: will add note about identifier being sanitized when used for file names.

>    ├── plank_<identifier>_defconfig

Author: done

  The board directory name does not need to match the name of the board.
  Multiple boards can even defined be in one directory.

Your board directory should look like this:

.. code-block:: none

>    boards/<ARCH>/plank

Author: Starting to be worried `ARCH` will be haunting us in various places for a foreseeable future.

Fixed

   ├── board.yml
   ├── board.cmake
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── doc
   │   ├── plank.png
   │   └── index.rst
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig
   ├── plank_<identifier>_defconfig
   ├── plank.dts
   ├── plank_<identifier>.dts
   ├── plank_<identifier>.overlay
   └── plank.yaml

Replace ``plank`` with your board's name, of course.

The mandatory files are:

> #. :file:`board.yml`: a YAML file describe the highlevel meta data of the board

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. :file:`board.yml`: a YAML file describing the high-level meta data of the board
```

Author: Fixed

> #. :file:`board.yml`: a YAML file describe the highlevel meta data of the board

Author: Fixed

   such as the board name, SoCs, and variants.

>    Cpusets for multi-core SoCs are not described in this file as they are

Author: I think this is better left for the soc porting guide, and then we should reference that section here.

   inherited from the SoC's YAML description.

> #. :file:`plank.dts` or :file:`plank_<identifier>.dts`: a hardware description

Author: Thanks for your suggestion, make me give this some extra thoughts.

The structure of the doc has not changed from what exists in zephyr/main, and I kind of like too keep it at high-level overview / description here without additional links.

Afterall, the details follows shortly after in the `write Kconfig / devicetree / board yaml` sections below.

So prefer to keep as-is.

   in :ref:`devicetree <dt-guide>` format. This declares your SoC, connectors,
   and any other hardware components such as LEDs, buttons, sensors, or
   communication peripherals (USB, BLE controller, etc).

#. :file:`Kconfig.plank`: the base software configuration for selecting SoC and

>    other board and SoC related setting. No Kconfig settings outside the board
>    and SoC tree must be selected. To select general Zephyr Kconfig settings the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   other board and SoC related settings. Kconfig settings outside the board
   and SoC tree should not be selected. To select general Zephyr Kconfig settings the
```

Reviewer 3: *must not

Reviewer 2: "No Kconfig settings ... shall be selected" or "Kconfig .... shall not be selected"

Author: Thanks for the proposal, looks better, but i'll use the `must not` variant proposed commented by @nordicjm over the `shall not`.

>    and SoC tree must be selected. To select general Zephyr Kconfig settings the

Author: What is intended is to have a re-usable Kconfig tree for the hardware parts, board, soc, and arch. which can then be sourced into other trees. One example being sysbuild.

This would allow for creating default images based on board and SoC.
Anther use-case which has emerged is the possibility of an early / limited Kconfig run, to just handle the board and soc parts.

For this to work properly, the settings in the mentioned Kconfig.plank cannot select a Zephyr driver or compile option, but it can select a SoC.

Hope this make the intention clearer, and i'd be happy for any proposals which can clarify above text without writing a novel.

>    and SoC tree must be selected. To select general Zephyr Kconfig settings the

Reviewer: > What is intended is to have a re-usable Kconfig tree

Should this be given a name, and described somewhere, and have from here a link to that?

>    and SoC tree must be selected. To select general Zephyr Kconfig settings the

Author: > > What is intended is to have a re-usable Kconfig tree
> 
> Should this be given a name, and described somewhere, and have from here a link to that?

Good suggestion.

Added an entry here: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/issues/51831

The Kconfig hardware re-usable tree is something new, and doesn't belong in board / soc porting but deserve an independent decsription / pags (where ?!).
Thus outside scope of this PR.

   :file:`Kconfig` file shall be used.

The optional files are:

> - :file:`plank_<identifier>.overlay`: a hardware description overlay in

Reviewer 8: I found this document, and tried creating a plank_<soc>_<variant>.overlay, but it did not work. This is because cmake/dts.cmake only has support for BOARD_REVISION here:

https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/blob/3932ac8866f2c458a31030974993538d686f9667/cmake/modules/dts.cmake#L137

I wanted to see your intent on this. I'm also unsure if this impacts app overlays as I'm new.

Reviewer 3: This is working, i.e. in `zephyr/samples/hello_world/build`:
```
mkdir ../boards
echo "blah" > ../boards/nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns.overlay
cmake -GNinja -DBOARD=nrf5340dk//cpuapp/ns ..
...
-- Found BOARD.dts: /tmp/aa/zephyr/boards/nordic_nrf/nrf5340dk/nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns.dts
-- Found devicetree overlay: /tmp/aa/zephyr/samples/hello_world/boards/nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns.overlay
devicetree error: /tmp/aa/zephyr/samples/hello_world/boards/nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns.overlay:1 (column 1): parse error: expected '/' or label reference (&foo)
```
Note: has to be in a `boards` directory due to a bug

Reviewer 8: To be more precise, I was trying to add an overlay file to board/laird_connect/bl654_dvk called bl654_dvk_nrf52840_pa.overlay. The dts.cmake code ignoreed that. Is this a valid use of a .overlay file, or should they be limited to the samples/*/boards directory?

Author: > Note: has to be in a boards directory due to a bug

No, this was designed and documented to be that way.
Ref:
- https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/29990
- https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/31088

Author: > The dts.cmake code ignoreed that. Is this a valid use of a .overlay file, or should they be limited to the samples/*/boards directory?

when revision overlays was introduced in #29990 and #31088 it was purposely picked up only from `<appdir>/boards/` to not clutter more the `<appdir>` toplevel folder, but support for regular `<appdir>/<board>.overlay` was kept.

For HWMv2, then due to many boards will have the former `BOARD_NAME` identical to `BOARD_FULL_IDENTIFIER`, then we'll support this variant during initial transition, but long term, with all the possible combination of names, then I would advice to always place overlays under `<appdir>/boards/`.

Author: right. this part has been removed.

  :ref:`devicetree <dt-guide>` format. This file is used as overlay to a

>   :file:`plank.dts` baseline and allow you to adjust the base devicetree file
>   with adjustments according to the SoC or board variant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :file:`plank.dts` baseline and allows you to adjust the base devicetree file
  according to the SoC or board variant.
```

Author: Fixed

- :file:`Kconfig`, :file:`Kconfig.defconfig` software configuration in
  :ref:`kconfig` formats. This provides default settings for software features
  and peripheral drivers.
- :file:`plank_defconfig` and :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig`: software
  configuration in Kconfig ``.conf`` format.
- :file:`board.cmake`: used for :ref:`flash-and-debug-support`
- :file:`CMakeLists.txt`: if you need to add additional source files to

>   `your build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  your build.
```

Author: fixed

- :file:`doc/index.rst`, :file:`doc/plank.png`: documentation for and a picture
  of your board. You only need this if you're :ref:`contributing-your-board` to
  Zephyr.

> - :file:`plank.yaml`: a YAML file with miscellaneous metadata used by the

Author: we already today have a twister yaml for each variant. It's just that each variant is implemented as a board.

So nothing changes short term in this regard, but long term it will be possible to cleanup the twister yaml and then unify the n-yaml files, but this work is outside scope of current porting effort.

  :ref:`twister_script`.

.. _board_description:

Write your board YAML
*********************

> The board YAML file describes the highlevel board.

Author: Thanks, proposal applied.

This includes the SoC, board variants, and board revisions.

> Detailed configurations, such as hardware description and configuration is done

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Detailed configurations, such as hardware description and configuration, are done
```

Author: Fixed

- :file:`plank.yaml`: a YAML file with miscellaneous metadata used by the
  :ref:`twister_script`.

.. _board_description:

Write your board YAML
*********************

The board YAML file describes the board at a high level.
This includes the SoC, board variants, and board revisions.

Detailed configurations, such as hardware description and configuration are done
in devicetree and Kconfig.

The skeleton of the board YAML file is:

.. code-block:: yaml

   board:
     name: <board-name>
     vendor: <board-vendor>
     revision:

>        format: ["major.minor.patch", "letter", "number", "custom"]

Author: done, both locations

   	status = "okay";
   };

Only one ``.dts`` file will be used, and the most specific file which exists
will be used.

> This means that if both :file:`plank.dts` and :file:`plank_socA_foo.dts` exists,
> then when building for ``plank`` / ``plank/socA`` then :file:`plank.dts` is used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that if both :file:`plank.dts` and :file:`plank_socA_foo.dts` exist,
then when building for ``plank`` / ``plank/socA``, :file:`plank.dts` is used
```

Author: Fixed

. When building for ``plank//foo`` / ``plank/socA/foo`` the
:file:`plank_socA_foo.dts` is used.

This allows board maintainers to write a base devicetree file for the board

> or write specific devicetree files for a given SoC or variant.

Author: Applied

> It is also possible to just write an devicetree overlay file which will be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to just write a devicetree overlay file which will be used
```

Author: Fixed

together with the baseline devicetree file.

> If instead of creating :file:`plank_socA_foo.dts` you create

Author: suggestion applied.

   	status = "okay";
   };

Only one ``.dts`` file will be used, and the most specific file which exists
will be used.

This means that if both :file:`plank.dts` and :file:`plank_soc1_foo.dts` exist,
then when building for ``plank`` / ``plank/soc1``, then :file:`plank.dts` is
used. When building for ``plank//foo`` / ``plank/soc1/foo`` the
:file:`plank_soc1_foo.dts` is used.

This allows board maintainers to write a base devicetree file for the board
or write specific devicetree files for a given board's SoC or variant.

It is also possible to just write a devicetree overlay file which will be used
together with the baseline devicetree file.
That is, if instead of creating :file:`plank_soc1_foo.dts` you create
:file:`plank_soc1_foo.overlay`, then when building for ``plank/soc1/foo`` the
:file:`plank.dts` will be used and :file:`plank_soc1_foo.overlay` will be

> applied as overlay.

Author: has been removed

Setting Kconfig configuration values is documented in detail in
:ref:`setting_configuration_values`.

> There are one mandatory Kconfig file in the board directory, and several

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is one mandatory Kconfig file in the board directory, and several
```

Author: Fixed

> There are one mandatory Kconfig file in the board directory, and several

Reviewer: which one is mandatory :)?

Author: that is described under: `Create your board directory`.

optional files for a board named ``plank``:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/<vendor>/plank
   ├── Kconfig
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig
   └── plank_<identifier>_defconfig

:file:`Kconfig.plank`
  A shared Kconfig file which can be sourced both in Zephyr Kconfig and sysbuild
  Kconfig trees.

>   This file select the SoC in the Kconfig tree and potential other SoC related

Author: Fixed

>   Kconfig settings. This file must not select anythink outside the re-usable

Reviewer 4: s/anythink/anything

Author: fixed

  Kconfig board and SoC trees.

  A :file:`Kconfig.plank` may look like this:

  .. code-block:: kconfig

     config BOARD_PLANK
     	select SOC_SOCA

:file:`Kconfig`
  Included by :zephyr_file:`boards/Kconfig`.

  This file can provide board specific Kconfig settings which are specific to
  the current board.

>   Not all boards are having a :file:`Kconfig` file.

Reviewer 4: Avoid "are having". "have"/"need", ... would do

  .. code-block:: kconfig

     config BOARD_PLANK

>      	depends on SOC_SERIES_YOUR_SOC_SERIES_HERE

Reviewer 4: Should ` depends on SOC_SERIES_YOUR_SOC_SERIES_HERE` be kept ?

Author: No, should not be needed.

Removed to avoid confusion.

files for a board named ``plank``:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/<vendor>/plank
   ├── Kconfig
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig
   └── plank_<identifier>_defconfig

:file:`Kconfig.plank`
  A shared Kconfig file which can be sourced both in Zephyr Kconfig and sysbuild
  Kconfig trees.

  This file selects the SoC in the Kconfig tree and potential other SoC related
  Kconfig settings. This file must not select anything outside the re-usable
  Kconfig board and SoC trees.

  A :file:`Kconfig.plank` may look like this:

  .. code-block:: kconfig

     config BOARD_PLANK
     	select SOC_SOC1

  The Kconfig symbols :kconfig:option:`BOARD_<board>` and
  :kconfig:option:`BOARD_<board_with_identifier>` are constructed by the build
  system, therefore no type shall be defined in above code snippet.

:file:`Kconfig`
  Included by :zephyr_file:`boards/Kconfig`.

  This file can add Kconfig settings which are specific to the current board.

  Not all boards have a :file:`Kconfig` file.

  An example could be heap size adjustment.

  .. code-block:: kconfig

     config HEAP_MEM_POOL_ADD_SIZE_BOARD
     	int

>      	default <value> if <condition>

Reviewer 7: Now, this one looks like it belongs in `Kconfig.defconfig`, not `Kconfig`.
(I'm concerned about it being hard for users to decide what goes in which file.)

What I had in mind was something like `config BOARD_ENABLE_DCDC`, as an example of a board-specific setting that would appear in the "Board Options" menu.

Author: Rephrased, and included some guideline as well.

Author: > Now, this one looks like it belongs in `Kconfig.defconfig`, not `Kconfig`.

actually, this should be in `Kconfig`, not `Kconfig.defconfig` because it's defining a new Kconfig symbol, `HEAP_MEM_POOL_ADD_SIZE_BOARD` of type int. It's not adjusting the default for an existing setting (which is the purpose of Kconfig.default).

Setting Kconfig configuration values is documented in detail in
:ref:`setting_configuration_values`.

There is one mandatory Kconfig file in the board directory, and several optional
files for a board named ``plank``:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/<vendor>/plank
   ├── Kconfig
   ├── Kconfig.plank
   ├── Kconfig.defconfig
   ├── plank_defconfig
   └── plank_<identifier>_defconfig

:file:`Kconfig.plank`
  A shared Kconfig file which can be sourced both in Zephyr Kconfig and sysbuild
  Kconfig trees.

  This file selects the SoC in the Kconfig tree and potential other SoC related
  Kconfig settings. This file must not select anything outside the re-usable

>   Kconfig board and SoC trees.

Author: yes, will be more clear when this is addressed later in followup: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/68792#discussion_r1495597578

  A :file:`Kconfig.plank` may look like this:

  .. code-block:: kconfig

     config BOARD_PLANK

>      	select SOC_SOC1

Author: done

:file:`Kconfig`
  Included by :zephyr_file:`boards/Kconfig`.

  This file can provide board specific Kconfig settings which are specific to

>   the current board.

Author: Applied, and example updated.

  Not all boards have a :file:`Kconfig` file.

>   .. code-block:: kconfig

Author: done

     config BOARD_PLANK

>      	select SOC_PART_NUMBER_ABCDEFGH

Author: done

     endif # BOARD_PLANK

:file:`plank_defconfig` / :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig`
  A Kconfig fragment that is merged as-is into the final build directory
  :file:`.config` whenever an application is compiled for your board.

  If both the common :file:`plank_defconfig` and the board identifier specific

>   :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig` exists then both will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig` exist, then both will be used.
```

Author: fixed

>   This allows you to place all configuration which is common for all SoCs, CPU

Reviewer: "for all +board+ SoCs"(?)

Author: yep, fixed

  cores, and build variants in the base :file:`plank_defconfig` and only place
  the adjustments specific for a given SoC or build variant in the

>   :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig`.

Reviewer 7: Use of multiple defconfigs should be reconsidered in light of https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/68724.

For example, building for `qemu_cortex_a53/qemu_cortex_a53/smp` produces Kconfig warnings, because `qemu_cortex_a53_defconfig` conflicts with `qemu_cortex_a53_qemu_cortex_a53_smp_defconfig`.

Author: > Use of multiple defconfigs should be reconsidered in light of #68724.

Thanks for pointing to that proposal.
This PR is the doc and thus should describe the current behavior, therefore will continue the discussion related to the feature in #68724.

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the discussion. #68724 is now closed.

     endif # BOARD_PLANK

> 

Reviewer 3: `  Not all boards have a :file:`Kconfig.defconfig` file.`

Author: added above code block, so it follows same structure as the `Kconfig` file description.

:file:`plank_defconfig` / :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig`
  A Kconfig fragment that is merged as-is into the final build directory
  :file:`.config` whenever an application is compiled for your board.

  If both the common :file:`plank_defconfig` file and one or more board

>   identifier specific :file:`plank_<identifier>_defconfig` files exist, then

Reviewer 3: might want to mention revision also

Author: No, let's keep revisions out of here, just as it is on main. 

If this guide is also intended for someone making their first board then let's stick to this.
It's complex enough already.

The revision section describes the additional files for anyone in need of extending a board with more revisions.

See :ref:`application_board_version` for basics on this feature from the user
perspective.

Board revisions are described in the ``revision`` entry of the
:file:`board.yml`.

.. code-block:: yaml

   board:
     revision:
       format: ["major.minor.patch", "letter", "number", "custom"]
       default: <default-revision-value>
       exact: <true|false>
       revisions:
       - name: <revA>
       - name: <revB>

Zephyr natively supports the following revision formats:

- ``major.minor.patch``: match a three digit revision, such as ``1.2.3``.
- ``number``: match a single number.
- ``letter``: match a single letter.

.. _board_fuzzy_revision_matching:

Fuzzy revision matching
=======================

> Fuzzy revision matching is used when an exact revision is not required.

Author: reason I didn't use \`\``exact: false`\`\` was to not give the impression that \`\``exact: false`\`\` is required.

Writing as proposed may give a lot of unnecessary `exact: false` in board.yml files.

How about something like this:
> Fuzzy revision matching is enabled when exact is not defined or if matching is specified as ``exact: false`` in the
revision section in :file:`board.yml`.

> Fuzzy revision matching is used when an exact revision is not required.

Reviewer 7: Good point, I forgot `exact` was optional.
Then, I think it's sufficient to clarify that fuzzy matching is enabled by default.

See :ref:`application_board_version` for basics on this feature from the user
perspective.

Board revisions are described in the ``revision`` entry of the
:file:`board.yml`.

.. code-block:: yaml

   board:
     revision:
       format: <major.minor.patch|letter|number|custom>
       default: <default-revision-value>
       exact: <true|false>
       revisions:
       - name: <revA>
       - name: <revB>

Zephyr natively supports the following revision formats:

- ``major.minor.patch``: match a three digit revision, such as ``1.2.3``.
- ``number``: match a single number.

> - ``letter``: match a single letter.

Reviewer 3: should add a note that it only supports a single **uppercase** letter

Author: done

numbers that introduce incompatible changes.

Similar for ``letter`` where revision ``A``, ``D``, and ``F`` could be defined
and the user builds for ``plank@E``, the build system will target revision ``D``
.

Exact revision matching
-----------------------

Exact revision matching is enabled when ``exact: true`` is specified in the
revision section in :file:`board.yml`.

When exact is defined then building for ``plank@0.7.0`` in the above example
will result in the following error message:

.. code-block:: console

   Board revision `0.7.0` not found.  Please specify a valid board revision.

Board revision configuration adjustment
---------------------------------------

When the user builds for board ``plank@<revision>`` it is possible to make
adjustments to the board's normal configuration.

As described in the :ref:`default_board_configuration` and
:ref:`board_kconfig_files` sections the board default configuration is created
from the files :file:`<board>.dts` / :file:`<board>_<identifier>.dts` and
:file:`<board>_defconfig` / :file:`<board>_<identifier>_defconfig`.
When building for a specific board revision, the above files are used as

> starting point and the following board files will be used in addition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a starting point and the following board files will be used in addition:
```

Author: fixed (on line above).

- :file:`<board>_<identifier>_<revision>_defconfig`: a specific revision
  defconfig which is only used for the board and SOC / variants identified by
  ``<board>_<identifier>``.

- :file:`<board>_<revision>_defconfig`: a specific revision defconfig which is
  used for the board regardless of the SOC / variants.

- :file:`<board>_<identifier>_<revision>.overlay`: a specific revision dts
  overlay which is only used for the board and SOC / variants identified by
  ``<board>_<identifier>``.

> - :file:`<board>_<revision>.overlay`: a specific revision dts overlay which is

Reviewer 3: This is for boards themselves but note that this is not true for application folders with `<board>_<identifier>.overlay`, which did work with hwmv1

Author: correct, revision specific overlay files must go under `<appdir>/boards/` as documented.

The `<appdir>/<board>.overlay` is from before a `<appdir>/boards/` folder was supported.
If starting to also have revision specific overlays, then it's advised to use the `<appdir>/boards` folder to minimize clutter at app toplevel.

  used for the board regardless of the SOC / variants.

This split allows boards with multiple SoCs, multi-core SoCs, or variants to

> place common revision adjustments which applies to all SoCs and variants in a
> single file, while still provide the ability to place SoC or variant specific

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
place common revision adjustments which apply to all SoCs and variants in a
single file, while still providing the ability to place SoC or variant specific
```

Author: fixed

adjustments in a dedicated revision file.

Using the ``plank`` board from previous sections, then we could have the following
revision adjustments:

.. code-block:: none

   boards/zephyr/plank
   ├── plank_0_5_0_defconfig          # Kconfig adjustment for all plank board identifiers on revision 0.5.0
   ├── plank_0_5_0.overlay            # DTS overlay for all plank board identifiers on revision 0.5.0

>    └── plank_socA_foo_1_5_0_defconfig # Kconfig adjustment for plank board when building for socAm variant foo on revision 1.5.0

Reviewer: socA-m-

Author: fixed as part of other comment.

Custom revision.cmake files
***************************

Some boards may not use board revisions supported natively by Zephyr.
For example string revisions.

> One reason Zephyr revision doesn't support string revisions is partly because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One reason why Zephyr doesn't support string revisions is that
```

> One reason Zephyr revision doesn't support string revisions is partly because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One reason why Zephyr doesn't support string revisions is that
```

Author: fixed.
